TOMORROW evening Alex Salmond, the man who would take Scotland out of the United Kingdom, will debate Alistair Darling, who boringly insists on keeping it where it is. The nationalists trail in the polls. But Mr Salmond’s optimism about Scotland’s bright future as an independent country will probably come across better on television than Mr Darling’s pragmatic worries about pensions and the pound. The nationalists could come out of the debate looking good.

In which case, your correspondent submits, it could well be the high point for the cause of Scottish independence—not just in this campaign but for decades to come. And Scottish nationalism will not be the only variety to decline. Because, only partly coincidentally, the kind of British nationalism represented by the UK Independence Party (UKIP) is also in long-term retreat.

It is likely, though by no means certain, that Scots will vote to remain part of Britain on September 18th. The polls are stable, and they show the unionist camp ahead. We are told—and The Economist has argued—that even a small victory for the status quo would profoundly shake the union. But it would not shake it enough to increase the chances of Scotland voting to push off in a future referendum. The sad fact, if you are a nationalist, is that the climate for Scottish secession might never again be as favourable as it is now.

Three things are sustaining the “Yes” campaign. First, there is a Tory-led government in Westminster. This allows nationalists to argue that Scots, who so abhor Conservatives that they elected only one MP from the party in 2010, are currently disenfranchised. Second, the Tory-led government is busy slashing the state, and therefore furnishing social-democratic critics with many case studies in meanness. The “Yes” campaign is making hay of reforms like the bedroom tax—a measure intended to push people out of council houses that are too big for their needs. Third, oil and gas are still flowing in reasonable quantities from the North Sea. That makes it seem as though Scotland would be a rich country on its own.

It is highly unlikely that these three conditions will all be present again at any point in the next few decades. Tory governments come and go, but state austerity on this scale is unprecedented. And the North Sea is running dry. The year-on-year trend is not entirely predictable—output could well bump up and down—but the overall downward path is clear. Scottish nationalists will thus find it harder and harder to argue that their country is being impoverished by Westminster or that it would be better off on its own. This is their best chance to make the case.

UKIP, which wants Britain to leave the European Union, is riding high after its triumph in the European elections in May. But it no longer feels like an insurgent: YouGov polls put its support at 12-13%, down a little from earlier this year. At best, the party will win a small handful of seats in Westminster in the May 2015 general election—probably fewer than the Democratic Unionist Party, which has eight, and perhaps fewer than Plaid Cymru, which has three. That is hardly a political earthquake. And UKIP can be outflanked. The Conservatives and Labour are doing their best to talk tough on the issue of immigration, which especially agitates UKIP supporters; the Tories are also loudly pointing out that they would give people a vote on whether to remain in the EU.

Like the Scottish nationalists, UKIP will soon run into some nasty headwinds. If the Liberal Democrats are turfed out of government in 2015, as seems likely, they will start to hoover up “none of the above” protest voters—something that UKIP alone has been able to do for the past few years. As the economy recovers, voters will become less grumpy, which will hurt the party. UKIP feeds on the sense of unfairness even more than Scottish nationalists do.

And in the long term UKIP’s prospects look even worse. Robert Ford and Matthew Goodwin’s terrific book, “Revolt on the Right”, shows that the party’s supporters are disproportionately old and working-class. By their reckoning, 55% left school at 16 or younger. Almost all of the party’s supporters are white, too. In short, UKIP is on the wrong side of every demographic and social trend in modern Britain.

Mr Salmond could of course defy the polls and win his country’s independence. UKIP could roar back, particularly if the Tories tear themselves apart over Europe, as they habitually threaten to do. But it looks rather more likely that nationalism is going to retreat in the British Isles. This might not be a terrible tragedy.
